guides/usage-guides/skin-preparation/index.rst, before:

.. _skin-preparation:

Skin Preparation Guide
##########################

Why skin preparation is important?
***********************************

Proper skin preparation is crucial before recording any biopotential signal be it Electrocardiography (ECG), Electromyography (EMG), Electroencephalography (EEG), or Electrooculography (EOG).

- ``Clean skin surface`` Removes dead skin cells, oils, & other substances that increases skin impedance.
- ``Improve impedance`` Improves the conduction of electrical signals from the body to the recording equipment and minimizes impedance.
- ``Electrode-skin contact`` Ensures optimal contact between the electrodes and the skin surface.
- ``Signal quality`` Enhances the overall quality of recorded signals, providing clear & reliable data for analysis & improves the ability to capture subtle variations in biopotential signals.
- ``Consistency in recordings`` Reduces variability in signal quality, making it easier to make any Human-Computer Interface (HCI), Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) project or a real-world application.
- ``Long term adhesion`` Facilitates long-term adhesion & stable placement of electrodes to the skin during extended signal monitoring.

Kit Contents
**************

.. _Nuprep gel: https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/nuprep-gel/
.. _Electrode gel: https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/electrode-gel/
.. _Ten20 paste: https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/ten20-paste/

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Nuprep gel`_                       | Mildly abrasive, highly conductive gel that should be applied before placing the electrodes on the skin to improve signal quality & enhances the performance of monitoring electrodes.                |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Electrode Gel`_                    | Highly conductive gel that acts as a coupling agent between dry electrodes and the skin to aid the transmission of biopotential signals like ECG, EMG, EOG, or EEG.                                   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Ten20 paste`_                      | Contains the right balance of adhesiveness and conductivity, enabling the dry electrodes to remain in place while allowing the transmittance of biopotential signals.                                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Alcohol Swabs/Wet wipes             | Soft & non-woven pads that helps in cleaning the skin surface and does not leave any residue.                                                                                                         |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Cotton Swabs                        | Useful while applying nuprep gel or ten20 paste.                                                                                                                                                      |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. figure:: media/kit-contents.*
    :align: center

Steps to follow
*****************

You can follow the steps given below to do the skin preparation properly:

Step 1: Identify the targeted area
=====================================

Identify the target area where the gel electrodes or BioAmp Bands will be placed for recording the biopotential signals.

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-eog.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record EOG

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-emg.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record EMG

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-ecg.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record ECG

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-eeg.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record EEG

Step 2: Apply NuPrep gel
==========================

Take a small amount of NuPrep gel using a cotton swab and apply it on your targeted area.

.. figure:: media/step-2.*

Step 3: Clean the skin surface
===============================

Use gentle, circular motions to rub the gel on the skin surface. This removes all the dead skin cells & improves conductivity.

.. figure:: media/step-3.*
    :align: center

    Rub the gel gently using the cotton swab

.. warning:: Do not rub the gel for too long as it has abrasive properties and may cause skin redness and irritation.

Step 4: Wipe off the gel
===================================

Wipe away excess gel with alcohol swabs or wet wipes.

.. figure:: media/step-4.*
    :align: center

    Wipe away access gel

.. warning:: Close your eyes while using the alcohol swabs for EOG recording else it may cause eye redness & irritation.

Step 5: Measuring the signals
=================================

Now you can either use gel electrodes or BioAmp bands for the signal recording.

Using gel electrodes
----------------------

Connect the BioAmp cable to gel electrodes, peel the plastic backing from electrodes and place the IN+, IN-, REF cables according to your specific biopotential recording.

.. figure:: media/step-5a.*
    :align: center

    Placing gel electrodes on skin surface

.. note:: While placing the gel electrodes on the skin, make sure to place the non-sticky tab of the electrode in the direction opposite to your hair growth. This allows you to remove the electrodes easily without pulling off much body hair.

Using BioAmp bands
----------------------

Connect the BioAmp cable to your BioAmp band. Now apply a small amount of ``electrode gel`` or ``Ten20 conductive paste`` on the dry electrodes between the skin and metallic part of BioAmp cable. This improves the signal conductivity, enhancing overall signal quality.

.. figure:: media/step-5b.*
    :align: center

    Method 1: Using Electrode gel

.. figure:: media/step-5c.*
    :align: center

    Method 2: Using Ten20 paste

.. note:: The above graphics demonstrates the use of electrode gel/Ten20 paste with Muscle BioAmp Band. Similarly you can use Brain BioAmp Band and Heart BioAmp Band. Refer to :ref:`using-bioamp-bands` guide to assemble and use all the BioAmp Bands correctly.

Now you are all set! Make all the connections correctly and start recording your biopotential signals.

.. warning:: NuPrep gel, Ten20 paste and the alcohol swabs shouldn't be used if you have a history of skin allergies to lotions and cosmetics.

Commit message:

Add note for alcohol swabs in skin prep guide

guides/usage-guides/skin-preparation/index.rst, after:

.. _skin-preparation:

Skin Preparation Guide
##########################

Why skin preparation is important?
***********************************

Proper skin preparation is crucial before recording any biopotential signal be it Electrocardiography (ECG), Electromyography (EMG), Electroencephalography (EEG), or Electrooculography (EOG).

- ``Clean skin surface`` Removes dead skin cells, oils, & other substances that increases skin impedance.
- ``Improve impedance`` Improves the conduction of electrical signals from the body to the recording equipment and minimizes impedance.
- ``Electrode-skin contact`` Ensures optimal contact between the electrodes and the skin surface.
- ``Signal quality`` Enhances the overall quality of recorded signals, providing clear & reliable data for analysis & improves the ability to capture subtle variations in biopotential signals.
- ``Consistency in recordings`` Reduces variability in signal quality, making it easier to make any Human-Computer Interface (HCI), Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) project or a real-world application.
- ``Long term adhesion`` Facilitates long-term adhesion & stable placement of electrodes to the skin during extended signal monitoring.

Kit Contents
**************

.. _Nuprep gel: https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/nuprep-gel/
.. _Electrode gel: https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/electrode-gel/
.. _Ten20 paste: https://store.upsidedownlabs.tech/product/ten20-paste/

+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Nuprep gel`_                       | Mildly abrasive, highly conductive gel that should be applied before placing the electrodes on the skin to improve signal quality & enhances the performance of monitoring electrodes.                |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Electrode Gel`_                    | Highly conductive gel that acts as a coupling agent between dry electrodes and the skin to aid the transmission of biopotential signals like ECG, EMG, EOG, or EEG.                                   |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| `Ten20 paste`_                      | Contains the right balance of adhesiveness and conductivity, enabling the dry electrodes to remain in place while allowing the transmittance of biopotential signals.                                 |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Alcohol Swabs/Wet wipes             | Soft & non-woven pads that helps in cleaning the skin surface and does not leave any residue.                                                                                                         |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Cotton Swabs                        | Useful while applying nuprep gel or ten20 paste.                                                                                                                                                      |
+-------------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+

.. figure:: media/kit-contents.*
    :align: center

Steps to follow
*****************

You can follow the steps given below to do the skin preparation properly:

Step 1: Identify the targeted area
=====================================

Identify the target area where the gel electrodes or BioAmp Bands will be placed for recording the biopotential signals.

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-eog.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record EOG

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-emg.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record EMG

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-ecg.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record ECG

.. figure:: media/skin-prep-eeg.*
    :align: center

    Target area to record EEG

Step 2: Apply NuPrep gel
==========================

Take a small amount of NuPrep gel using a cotton swab and apply it on your targeted area.

.. figure:: media/step-2.*

Step 3: Clean the skin surface
===============================

Use gentle, circular motions to rub the gel on the skin surface. This removes all the dead skin cells & improves conductivity.

.. figure:: media/step-3.*
    :align: center

    Rub the gel gently using the cotton swab

.. warning:: Do not rub the gel for too long as it has abrasive properties and may cause skin redness and irritation.

Step 4: Wipe off the gel
===================================

Wipe away excess gel with alcohol swabs or wet wipes.

.. figure:: media/step-4.*
    :align: center

    Wipe away access gel

.. warning:: - Using alcohol swabs can dry out the skin, so don't use them if your skin is already dry.
    
    - Close your eyes while using the alcohol swabs for EOG recording else it may cause eye redness & irritation.

Step 5: Measuring the signals
=================================

Now you can either use gel electrodes or BioAmp bands for the signal recording.

Using gel electrodes
----------------------

Connect the BioAmp cable to gel electrodes, peel the plastic backing from electrodes and place the IN+, IN-, REF cables according to your specific biopotential recording.

.. figure:: media/step-5a.*
    :align: center

    Placing gel electrodes on skin surface

.. note:: While placing the gel electrodes on the skin, make sure to place the non-sticky tab of the electrode in the direction opposite to your hair growth. This allows you to remove the electrodes easily without pulling off much body hair.

Using BioAmp bands
----------------------

Connect the BioAmp cable to your BioAmp band. Now apply a small amount of ``electrode gel`` or ``Ten20 conductive paste`` on the dry electrodes between the skin and metallic part of BioAmp cable. This improves the signal conductivity, enhancing overall signal quality.

.. figure:: media/step-5b.*
    :align: center

    Method 1: Using Electrode gel

.. figure:: media/step-5c.*
    :align: center

    Method 2: Using Ten20 paste

.. note:: The above graphics demonstrates the use of electrode gel/Ten20 paste with Muscle BioAmp Band. Similarly you can use Brain BioAmp Band and Heart BioAmp Band. Refer to :ref:`using-bioamp-bands` guide to assemble and use all the BioAmp Bands correctly.

Now you are all set! Make all the connections correctly and start recording your biopotential signals.

.. warning:: NuPrep gel, Ten20 paste and the alcohol swabs shouldn't be used if you have a history of skin allergies to lotions and cosmetics.
